    #[1]publisher

     * Sections
     * Latest
     * Popular
     * Search
     * [2]Subscribe

     * Sign in
    [3]My Account | Sign Out
     * [4]

TNY Store
     * [5][CM_Unit-StickyNav.png]

     *
         1. [6]

John Hersey, the Writer Who Let "Hiroshima" Speak for Itself
            by [7]Russell Shorto
         2. [8]

Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the Voice of ISIS, Is Dead
            by [9]Robin Wright
         3. [10]

Why Movies Still Matter
            by [11]Richard Brody
         4. [12]

Lost Time in Amatrice
            by [13]Marcia Bjornerud
     *
         1. [14]

Spin
            by [15]Jeffrey Toobin
         2. [16]

Riz Ahmed's Tragic Transformation on "The Night Of"
            by [17]Alexis Okeowo
         3. [18]

Postscript: The Festive Genius of Juan Gabriel, 1950-2016
            by [19]León Krauze
         4. [20]

What Makes You So Sure?
            by [21]Adam Kirsch
     * ____________________ (BUTTON) Go

Sign in

[22]My Account | Sign Out

     * [23]Election
     * [24]News
     * [25]Culture
     * [26]Books
     * [27]Business & Tech
     * [28]Humor
     * [29]Cartoons
     * [30]Magazine
     * [31]Video
     * [32]Archive
     * [33]Festival
     * [34]

  Search

   [35][Article_hamburger.png]

   Subscribe to The New Yorker

[36]Annals of the Presidency

   [37]January 27, 2014 Issue

                               Going the Distance

On and off the road with Barack Obama.

By [38]David Remnick

     *
     *
     *
     *

   Obama's Presidency is on the clock. Hard as it has been to pass
   legislation, the coming year is a marker, the final interval before the
   fight for succession becomes politically all-consuming.

   Obama's Presidency is on the clock. Hard as it has been to pass
   legislation, the coming year is a marker, the final interval before the
   fight for succession becomes politically all-consuming. Credit
   Photographs by Pari Dukovic

   On the Sunday afternoon before Thanksgiving, Barack Obama sat in the
   office cabin of Air Force One wearing a look of heavy-lidded annoyance.
   The Affordable Care Act, his signature domestic achievement and, for
   all its limitations, the most ambitious social legislation since the
   Great Society, half a century ago, was in jeopardy. His approval rating
   was down to forty per cent--lower than George W. Bush's in December of
   2005, when Bush admitted that the decision to invade Iraq had been
   based on intelligence that "turned out to be wrong." Also, Obama said
   thickly, "I've got a fat lip."

   That morning, while playing basketball at F.B.I. headquarters, Obama
   went up for a rebound and came down empty-handed; he got, instead, the
   sort of humbling reserved for middle-aged men who stubbornly refuse the
   transition to the elliptical machine and Gentle Healing Yoga. This had
   happened before. In 2010, after taking a self-described "shellacking"
   in the midterm elections, Obama caught an elbow in the mouth while
   playing ball at Fort McNair. He wound up with a dozen stitches. The
   culprit then was one Reynaldo Decerega, a member of the Congressional
   Hispanic Caucus Institute. Decerega wasn't invited to play again,
   though Obama sent him a photograph inscribed "For Rey, the only guy
   that ever hit the President and didn't get arrested. Barack."

   This time, the injury was slighter and no assailant was named--"I think
   it was the ball," Obama said--but the President needed little
   assistance in divining the metaphor in this latest insult to his
   person. The pundits were declaring 2013 the worst year of his
   Presidency. The Republicans had been sniping at Obamacare since its
   passage, nearly four years earlier, and HealthCare.gov, a Web site that
   was undertested and overmatched, was a gift to them. There were other
   beribboned boxes under the tree: Edward Snowden's revelations about the
   National Security Agency; the failure to get anything passed on gun
   control or immigration reform; the unseemly waffling over whether the
   Egyptian coup was a coup; the solidifying wisdom in Washington that the
   President was "disengaged," allergic to the forensic and seductive arts
   of political persuasion. The congressional Republicans quashed nearly
   all legislation as a matter of principle and shut down the government
   for sixteen days, before relenting out of sheer tactical confusion and
   embarrassment--and yet it was the President's miseries that dominated
   the year-end summations.

   Obama worried his lip with his tongue and the tip of his index finger.
   He sighed, slumping in his chair. The night before, Iran had agreed to
   freeze its nuclear program for six months. A final pact, if one could
   be arrived at, would end the prospect of a military strike on Iran's
   nuclear facilities and the hell that could follow: terror attacks,
   proxy battles, regional war--take your pick. An agreement could even
   help normalize relations between the United States and Iran for the
   first time since the Islamic Revolution, in 1979. Obama put the odds of
   a final accord at less than even, but, still, how was this not good
   news?

   The answer had arrived with breakfast. The Saudis, the Israelis, and
   the Republican leadership made their opposition known on the
   Sunday-morning shows and through diplomatic channels. Benjamin
   Netanyahu, the Israeli Prime Minister, called the agreement a "historic
   mistake." Even a putative ally like New York Senator Chuck Schumer
   could go on "Meet the Press" and, fearing no retribution from the White
   House, hint that he might help bollix up the deal. Obama hadn't tuned
   in. "I don't watch Sunday-morning shows," he said. "That's been a
   well-established rule." Instead, he went out to play ball.

   Usually, Obama spends Sundays with his family. Now he was headed for a
   three-day fund-raising trip to Seattle, San Francisco, and Los Angeles,
   rattling the cup in one preposterous mansion after another. The
   prospect was dispiriting. Obama had already run his last race, and the
   chances that the Democratic Party will win back the House of
   Representatives in the 2014 midterm elections are slight. The Democrats
   could, in fact, lose the Senate.

   For an important trip abroad, Air Force One is crowded with advisers,
   military aides, Secret Service people, support staff, the press pool.
   This trip was smaller, and I was along for the ride, sitting in a guest
   cabin with a couple of aides and a staffer who was tasked with keeping
   watch over a dark suit bag with a tag reading "The President."

   Obama spent his flight time in the private quarters in the nose of the
   plane, in his office compartment, or in a conference room. At one point
   on the trip from Andrews Air Force Base to Seattle, I was invited up
   front for a conversation. Obama was sitting at his desk watching the
   Miami Dolphins-Carolina Panthers game. Slender as a switch, he wore a
   white shirt and dark slacks; a flight jacket was slung over his
   high-backed leather chair. As we talked, mainly about the Middle East,
   his eyes wandered to the game. Reports of multiple concussions and
   retired players with early-onset dementia had been in the news all
   year, and so, before I left, I asked if he didn't feel at all
   ambivalent about following the sport. He didn't.

   "I would not let my son play pro football," he conceded. "But, I mean,
   you wrote a lot about boxing, right? We're sort of in the same realm."

   The Miami defense was taking on a Keystone Kops quality, and Obama, who
   had lost hope on a Bears contest, was starting to lose interest in the
   Dolphins. "At this point, there's a little bit of caveat emptor," he
   went on. "These guys, they know what they're doing. They know what
   they're buying into. It is no longer a secret. It's sort of the feeling
   I have about smokers, you know?"
   [39]Cartoon
     * [40]Share
     * [41]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [42]Buy a cartoon

   Obama chewed furtively on a piece of Nicorette. His carriage and the
   cadence of his conversation are usually so measured that I was thrown
   by the lingering habit, the trace of indiscipline. "I'm not a purist,"
   he said.

I--ON THE CLOCK

   When Obama leaves the White House, on January 20, 2017, he will write a
   memoir. "Now, that's a slam dunk," the former Obama adviser David
   Axelrod told me. Andrew Wylie, a leading literary agent, said he
   thought that publishers would pay between seventeen and twenty million
   dollars for the book--the most ever for a work of nonfiction--and
   around twelve million for Michelle Obama's memoirs. (The First Lady has
   already started work on hers.) Obama's best friend, Marty Nesbitt, a
   Chicago businessman, told me that, important as the memoir might be to
   Obama's legacy and to his finances, "I don't see him locked up in a
   room writing all the time. His capacity to crank stuff out is amazing.
   When he was writing his second book, he would say, `I'm gonna get up at
   seven and write this chapter--and at nine we'll play golf.' I would
   think no, it's going to be a lot later, but he would knock on my door
   at nine and say, `Let's go.' " Nesbitt thinks that Obama will work on
   issues such as human rights, education, and "health and wellness." "He
   was a local community organizer when he was young," he said. "At the
   back end of his career, I see him as an international and national
   community organizer."

   Yet no post-Presidential project--even one as worthy as Ulysses S.
   Grant's memoirs or Jimmy Carter's efforts to eradicate the Guinea worm
   in Africa--can overshadow what can be accomplished in the White House
   with the stroke of a pen or a phone call. And, after a miserable year,
   Obama's Presidency is on the clock. Hard as it has been to pass
   legislation since the Republicans took the House, in 2010, the coming
   year is a marker, the final interval before the fight for succession
   becomes politically all-consuming.

   "The conventional wisdom is that a President's second term is a matter
   of minimizing the damage and playing defense rather than playing
   offense," Obama said in one of our conversations on the trip and at the
   White House. "But, as I've reminded my team, the day after I was
   inaugurated for a second term, we're in charge of the largest
   organization on earth, and our capacity to do some good, both
   domestically and around the world, is unsurpassed, even if nobody is
   paying attention."

   In 2007, at the start of Obama's Presidential campaign, the historian
   Doris Kearns Goodwin and her husband, Richard Goodwin, who worked in
   the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, visited him in his Senate
   office. "I have no desire to be one of those Presidents who are just on
   the list--you see their pictures lined up on the wall," Obama told
   them. "I really want to be a President who makes a difference." As she
   put it to me then, "There was the sense that he wanted to be big. He
   didn't want to be Millard Fillmore or Franklin Pierce."

   The question is whether Obama will satisfy the standard he set for
   himself. His biggest early disappointment as President was being forced
   to recognize that his romantic vision of a post-partisan era, in which
   there are no red states or blue states, only the United States, was, in
   practical terms, a fantasy. It was a difficult fantasy to relinquish.
   The spirit of national conciliation was more than the rhetorical pixie
   dust of Obama's 2004 speech to the Democratic National Convention, in
   Boston, which had brought him to delirious national attention. It was
   also an elemental component of his self-conception, his sense that he
   was uniquely suited to transcend ideology and the grubby battles of the
   day. Obama is defensive about this now. "My speech in Boston was an
   aspirational speech," he said. "It was not a description of our
   politics. It was a description of what I saw in the American people."

   The structures of American division came into high relief once he was
   in office. The debate over the proper scale and scope of the federal
   government dates to the Founders, but it has intensified since the
   Reagan revolution. Both Bill Clinton and Obama have spent as much time
   defending progressive advances--from Social Security and Medicare to
   voting rights and abortion rights--as they have trying to extend them.
   The Republican Party is living through the late-mannerist phase of that
   revolution, fuelled less by ideas than by resentments. The moderate
   Republican tradition is all but gone, and the reactionaries who claim
   Reagan's banner display none of his ideological finesse. Rejection is
   all. Obama can never be opposed vehemently enough.

   The dream of bipartisan coöperation glimmered again after Obama won
   reëlection against Mitt Romney with fifty-one per cent of the popular
   vote. The President talked of the election breaking the "fever" in
   Washington. "We didn't expect the floodgates would open and Boehner
   would be Tip O'Neill to our Reagan," Dan Pfeiffer, a senior adviser to
   the President, said. But reëlection, he thought, had "liberated" Obama.
   The second Inaugural Address was the most liberal since the
   nineteen-sixties. Obama pledged to take ambitious action on climate
   change, immigration, gun control, voting rights, infrastructure, tax
   reform. He warned of a nation at "perpetual war." He celebrated the
   Seneca Falls Convention, the Selma-to-Montgomery marches, and the
   Stonewall riots as events in a narrative of righteous struggle. He
   pledged "collective action" on economic fairness, and declared that the
   legacy of Medicare, Social Security, and Medicaid does "not make us a
   nation of takers; they free us to take the risks that make this country
   great." Pfeiffer said, "His point was that Congress won't set the
   limits of what I will do. I won't trim my vision. And, even if I can't
   get it done, I will set the stage so it does get done" in the years
   ahead. Then came 2013, annus horribilis.
   [43]Cartoon "To make it more sporting, I've also blindfolded the men."
     * [44]Share
     * [45]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [46]Buy a cartoon

   Obama's election was one of the great markers in the black freedom
   struggle. In the electoral realm, ironically, the country may be more
   racially divided than it has been in a generation. Obama lost among
   white voters in 2012 by a margin greater than any victor in American
   history. The popular opposition to the Administration comes largely
   from older whites who feel threatened, underemployed, overlooked, and
   disdained in a globalized economy and in an increasingly diverse
   country. Obama's drop in the polls in 2013 was especially grave among
   white voters. "There's no doubt that there's some folks who just really
   dislike me because they don't like the idea of a black President,"
   Obama said. "Now, the flip side of it is there are some black folks and
   maybe some white folks who really like me and give me the benefit of
   the doubt precisely because I'm a black President." The latter group
   has been less in evidence of late.

   "There is a historic connection between some of the arguments that we
   have politically and the history of race in our country, and sometimes
   it's hard to disentangle those issues," he went on. "You can be
   somebody who, for very legitimate reasons, worries about the power of
   the federal government--that it's distant, that it's bureaucratic, that
   it's not accountable--and as a consequence you think that more power
   should reside in the hands of state governments. But what's also true,
   obviously, is that philosophy is wrapped up in the history of states'
   rights in the context of the civil-rights movement and the Civil War
   and Calhoun. There's a pretty long history there. And so I think it's
   important for progressives not to dismiss out of hand arguments against
   my Presidency or the Democratic Party or Bill Clinton or anybody just
   because there's some overlap between those criticisms and the
   criticisms that traditionally were directed against those who were
   trying to bring about greater equality for African-Americans. The flip
   side is I think it's important for conservatives to recognize and
   answer some of the problems that are posed by that history, so that
   they understand if I am concerned about leaving it up to states to
   expand Medicaid that it may not simply be because I am this
   power-hungry guy in Washington who wants to crush states' rights but,
   rather, because we are one country and I think it is going to be
   important for the entire country to make sure that poor folks in
   Mississippi and not just Massachusetts are healthy."

   Obama's advisers are convinced that if the Republicans don't find a way
   to attract non-white voters, particularly Hispanics and Asians, they
   may lose the White House for two or three more election cycles. And yet
   Obama still makes every effort to maintain his careful, balancing tone,
   as if the unifying moment were still out there somewhere in the middle
   distance. "There were times in our history where Democrats didn't seem
   to be paying enough attention to the concerns of middle-class folks or
   working-class folks, black or white," he said. "And this was one of the
   great gifts of Bill Clinton to the Party--to say, you know what, it's
   entirely legitimate for folks to be concerned about getting mugged, and
   you can't just talk about police abuse. How about folks not feeling
   safe outside their homes? It's all fine and good for you to want to do
   something about poverty, but if the only mechanism you have is raising
   taxes on folks who are already feeling strapped, then maybe you need to
   widen your lens a little bit. And I think that the Democratic Party is
   better for it. But that was a process. And I am confident that the
   Republicans will go through that same process."

   For the moment, though, the opposition party is content to define
   itself, precisely, by its opposition. As Obama, a fan of the
   "Godfather" movies, has put it, "It turns out Marlon Brando had it
   easy, because, when it comes to Congress, there is no such thing as an
   offer they can't refuse."

II--THE LONG VIEW

   At dusk, Air Force One touched down at the Seattle-Tacoma International
   Airport. Obama and his adviser Valerie Jarrett stood for a moment on
   the tarmac gazing at Mt. Rainier, the snow a candied pink. Then Obama
   nodded. Moment over. They got in the car and headed for town. Obama's
   limousine, a Cadillac said to weigh as much as fifteen thousand pounds,
   is known as the Beast. It is armored with ceramic, titanium, aluminum,
   and steel to withstand bomb blasts, and it is sealed in case of
   biochemical attack. The doors are as heavy as those on a Boeing 757.
   The tires are gigantic "run-flats," reinforced with Kevlar. A supply of
   blood matching the President's type is kept in the trunk.

   The Beast ascended the driveway of Jon Shirley, in the Seattle suburb
   of Medina, on Lake Washington. (Jeff Bezos and Bill Gates live in town,
   too.) Shirley earned his pile during the early days of high tech, first
   at Tandy and then, in the eighties, at Microsoft, where he served as
   president. Shirley's lawn is littered with gargantuan modern
   sculptures. A Claes Oldenburg safety pin loomed in the dark. The Beast
   pulled up to Shirley's front door.

   One of the enduring mysteries of the Obama years is that so many
   members of the hyper-deluxe economy--corporate C.E.O.s and Wall Street
   bankers--have abandoned him. The Dow is more than twice what it was
   when Obama took office, in 2009; corporate profits are higher than they
   have been since the end of the Second World War; the financial crisis
   of 2008-09 vaporized more than nine trillion dollars in real-estate
   value, and no major purveyor of bogus mortgages or dodgy derivatives
   went to jail. Obama bruised some feelings once or twice with remarks
   about "fat-cat bankers" and "reckless behavior and unchecked excess,"
   but, in general, he dares not offend. In 2011, at an annual dinner he
   holds at the White House with American historians, he asked the group
   to help him find a language in which he could address the problem of
   growing inequality without being accused of class warfare.

   Inside Shirley's house, blue-chip works of modern art--paintings,
   sculpture, installations--were on every wall, in every corner: Katz,
   Kline, Klein, Pollock, Zhang Huan, Richter, Arp, Rothko, Close, Calder.
   The house measures more than twenty-seven thousand square feet. There
   are only two bedrooms. In the library, the President went through a
   familiar fund-raiser routine: a pre-event private "clutch," where he
   shakes hands, makes small talk, and poses for pictures with an inner
   group--the host, the governor, the chosen.
   [47]Cartoon "I'm sorry--it takes me a really long time to move in my
   ridiculous coat."
     * [48]Share
     * [49]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [50]Buy a cartoon

   Down the hall, in a room scaled like an airplane hangar, about seventy
   guests, having paid sixteen thousand dollars each to the Democratic
   Congressional Campaign Committee kitty, ate dinner and waited. Near
   some very artistic furniture, I stood with Valerie Jarrett, Obama's
   most intimate consigliere. To admirers, Jarrett is known as "the third
   Obama"; to wary aides, who envy her long history with the Obamas and
   her easy access to the living quarters of the White House, she is the
   Night Stalker. Rahm Emanuel, David Axelrod, Robert Gibbs, David
   Plouffe, and many others in the Administration have clashed with her.
   They are gone. She remains--a constant presence, at meetings, at meals,
   in the Beast. While we were waiting for Obama to speak to the group, I
   asked Jarrett whether the health-care rollout had been the worst
   political fiasco Obama had confronted so far.

   "I really don't think so," she said. Like all Obama advisers, she was
   convinced that the problems would get "fixed"--just as Social Security
   was fixed after a balky start, in 1937--and the memory of the botched
   rollout would recede. That was the hope and that was the spin. And then
   she said something that I've come to think of as the Administration's
   mantra: "The President always takes the long view."

   That appeal to patience and historical reckoning, an appeal that risks
   a maddening high-mindedness, is something that everyone around Obama
   trots out to combat the hysterias of any given moment. "He has learned
   through those vicissitudes that every day is Election Day in Washington
   and everyone is writing history in ten-minute intervals," Axelrod told
   me. "But the truth is that history is written over a long period of
   time--and he will be judged in the long term."

   Obama stepped up to a platform and went to work. First ingratiation,
   then gratitude, then answers. He expressed awe at the sight of Mt.
   Rainier. Being in Seattle, he said, made him "feel the spirit of my
   mom," the late Ann Dunham, who went to high school nearby, on Mercer
   Island. He praised his host's hospitality. ("The only problem when I
   come to Jon's house is I want to just kind of roam around and check
   stuff out, and instead I've got to talk.") Then came a version of the
   long-game riff: "One thing that I always try to emphasize is that, if
   you look at American history, there have been frequent occasions in
   which it looked like we had insoluble problems--either economic,
   political, security--and, as long as there were those who stayed steady
   and clear-eyed and persistent, eventually we came up with an answer."

   As Obama ticked off a list of first-term achievements--the economic
   rescue, the forty-four straight months of job growth, a reduction in
   carbon emissions, a spike in clean-energy technology--he seemed
   efficient but contained, running at three-quarters speed, like an
   athlete playing a midseason road game of modest consequence; he was
   performing just hard enough to leave a decent impression, get paid, and
   avoid injury. Even in front of West Coast liberals, he is always
   careful to disavow liberalism--the word, anyway. "I'm not a
   particularly ideological person," Obama told Jon Shirley and his
   guests. "There's things, some values I feel passionately about." He
   said that these included making sure that everybody is "being treated
   with dignity or respect regardless of what they look like or what their
   last name is or who they love," providing a strong defense, and
   "leaving a planet that is as spectacular as the one we inherited from
   our parents and our grandparents." He continued, "So there are values
   I'm passionate about, but I'm pretty pragmatic when it comes to how we
   get there."

   Obama said he'd take some questions--in "boy, girl, boy, girl" order.
   He tried to rally the Democrats and expressed dismay with the
   opposition. ("There are reasonable conservatives and there are those
   who just want to burn down the house.") He played both sides of the
   environment issues, rehearsing the arguments for and against the
   Keystone pipeline and sympathizing with the desire of China and India
   to lift millions out of poverty--but if they consume energy the way the
   United States has "we'll be four feet under water." This is the
   archetypal Obama habit of mind and politics, the calm, professorial
   immersion in complexity played out in front of ardent supporters who
   crave a rallying cry. It's what compelled him to declare himself a
   non-pacifist as he was accepting the Nobel Peace Prize, in Oslo, and
   praise Ronald Reagan in a Democratic primary debate.

   And that was the end of the performance. A few minutes later, the
   motorcade was snaking through the streets of suburban Seattle--kids in
   pajamas holding signs and sparklers, the occasional protester, Obama
   secured in the back seat of the Beast. He could hear nothing. The
   windows of his car are five inches thick.

III--PRESIDENTIAL M&M'S

   The next morning, a Monday, I woke early and turned on CNN. Senator
   Lindsey Graham, who is facing a primary challenge from four Tea Party
   candidates in South Carolina, was saying with utter confidence that
   Iran had hoodwinked the Administration in Geneva. Next came a poll
   showing that the majority of the country now believed that the
   President was neither truthful nor honest. The announcer added with a
   smile that GQ had put Obama at No. 17 on its "least influential"
   list--right up there with Pope Benedict XVI in his retirement, the
   cicadas that never showed up last summer, and Manti Te'o's fake dead
   girlfriend.

   In the hotel lobby, I met Jeff Tiller, who works for the White House
   press operation. In college, he became interested in politics and later
   joined Obama's 2008 Presidential campaign. From there, he volunteered
   at the White House, which led to a string of staff jobs, and eventually
   he was doing advance work all over the world for the White House. The
   aides on the plane were like Tiller--committed members of a cheerful,
   overworked microculture who could barely conceal their pleasure in
   Presidential propinquity. I'm twenty-seven and this is my thirty-second
   time on Air Force One. "I pinch myself sometimes," Tiller said. Dan
   Pfeiffer, who has been with Obama since 2007, was so overworked last
   year that he suffered a series of mini-strokes. "But no worries," he
   told me. "I'm good!"
   [51]"The things you start may not come to full fruition on your
   timetable," Obama says. "But you can move things forward. And sometimes
   the things that start small may turn out to be fairly significant."
   "The things you start may not come to full fruition on your timetable,"
   Obama says. "But you can move things forward. And sometimes the things
   that start small may turn out to be fairly significant."

   We arrived in San Francisco, and the motorcade raced along, free of
   traffic and red lights, from the airport to a community center in
   Chinatown named after Betty Ong, a flight attendant who perished when
   American Airlines Flight 11 was hijacked and crashed into the World
   Trade Center. Obama was to give a speech on immigration. Out the
   window, you could see people waving, people hoisting their babies as if
   to witness history, people holding signs protesting one issue or
   another--the Keystone pipeline, especially--and, everywhere, the iPhone
   clickers, the Samsung snappers.

   The Beast pulled under a makeshift security tent. Obama gets to events
   like these through underground hallways, industrial kitchens, holding
   rooms--all of which have been checked for bombs. At the Ong Center, he
   met with his hosts and their children. ("I think I have some
   Presidential M&M's for you!") People get goggle-eyed when it's their
   turn for a picture. Obama tries to put them at ease: "C'mon in here!
   Let's do this!" Sometimes there is teasing of the mildest sort: "Chuck
   Taylor All-Stars! Old style, baby!" A woman told the President that she
   was six months pregnant. She didn't look it. "Whoa! Don't tell that to
   Michelle. She'll be all . . ." The woman said she was having a girl.
   Obama was delighted: "Daughters! You can't beat 'em!" He pulled her in
   for the photo. From long experience, Obama has learned what works for
   him in pictures: a broad, toothy smile. A millisecond after the flash,
   the sash releases, the smile drops, a curtain falling.

   A little later, Betty Ong's mother and siblings arrived. Obama drew
   them into a huddle. I heard him saying that Betty was a hero, though
   "obviously, the heartache never goes away." Obama really is skilled at
   this kind of thing, the kibbitzing and the expressions of sympathy, the
   hugging and the eulogizing and the celebrating, the sheer animal
   activity of human politics--but he suffers an anxiety of comparison.
   Bill Clinton was, and is, the master, a hyper-extrovert whose freakish
   memory for names and faces, and whose indomitable will to enfold and
   charm everyone in his path, remains unmatched. Obama can be a dynamic
   speaker before large audiences and charming in very small groups, but,
   like a normal human being and unlike the near-pathological
   personalities who have so often held the office, he is depleted by the
   act of schmoozing a group of a hundred as if it were an intimate
   gathering. At fund-raisers, he would rather eat privately with a couple
   of aides before going out to perform. According to the Wall Street
   Journal, when Jeffrey Katzenberg threw a multi-million-dollar
   fund-raiser in Los Angeles two years ago, he told the President's staff
   that he expected Obama to stop at each of the fourteen tables and talk
   for a while. No one would have had to ask Clinton. Obama's staffers
   were alarmed. When you talk about this with people in Obamaland, they
   let on that Clinton borders on the obsessive--as if the appetite for
   connection were related to what got him in such deep trouble.

   "Obama is a genuinely respectful person, but he doesn't try to seduce
   everyone," Axelrod said. "It's never going to be who he'll be." Obama
   doesn't love fund-raising, he went on, "and, if you don't love it in
   the first place, you're not likely to grow fonder of it over time."

   Obama has other talents that serve him well in public. Like a seasoned
   standup comedian, he has learned that a well-timed heckler can be his
   ally. It allows him to dramatize his open-mindedness, even his own
   philosophical ambivalences about a particularly difficult political or
   moral question. Last May, at the National Defense University, where he
   was giving a speech on counter-terrorism, a woman named Medea Benjamin,
   the co-founder of the group Code Pink, interrupted him, loudly and at
   length, to talk about drone strikes and about closing the American
   prison at Guantánamo Bay. While some in the audience tried to drown her
   out with applause, and security people proceeded to drag her away,
   Obama asserted Benjamin's right to "free speech," and declared, "The
   voice of that woman is worth paying attention to."

   At the Ong Center, an undocumented immigrant from South Korea named Ju
   Hong was in the crowd lined up behind the President. Toward the end of
   Obama's speech, Ju Hong, a Berkeley graduate, broke in, demanding that
   the President use his executive powers to stop deportations.

   Obama wheeled around. "If, in fact, I could solve all these problems
   without passing laws in Congress, then I would do so, but we're also a
   nation of laws," he said, making his case to a wash of applause.

   At the next event, a fund-raiser for the Democratic National Committee
   at a music venue, the SFJAZZ Center, Obama met the host's family ("Hold
   on, we got some White House M&M's") and then made his way to the
   backstage holding area. You could hear the murmur of security
   communications: "Renegade with greeters"--Renegade being Obama's Secret
   Service handle.

   Obama worked with more enthusiasm than at the midday event. He did the
   polite handshake; the full pull-in; the hug and double backslap; the
   slap-shake; the solicitous arm-around-the-older woman. ("And you stand
   here. . . . Perfect!")

   The clutch over, the crowd cleared away, Obama turned to his aides and
   said, "How many we got out there?"

   "Five hundred. Five-fifty."

   "Five-fifty?" Obama said, walking toward the wings of the stage. "What
   are we talking about? Politics? Can't we talk about something else?
   Sports?"

   The aides were, as ever, staring down at their iPhones, scrolling,
   tapping, mentally occupying a psychic space somewhere between where
   they were and the unspooling news cycle back in Washington.

   "We're off the cuff," Pfeiffer said. No prepared speech.

   "Off the cuff? Sounds good. Let's go do it."

   Obama walked toward the stage and, as he was announced, he mouthed the
   words: "Ladies and gentlemen, the President of the United States."
   [52]Cartoon "That's what I'd give my sister-in-law if she could take
   care of nice things."
     * [53]Share
     * [54]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [55]Buy a cartoon

   Then it happened again: another heckler broke into Obama's speech. A
   man in the balcony repeatedly shouted out, "Executive order!,"
   demanding that the President bypass Congress with more unilateral
   actions. Obama listened with odd indulgence. Finally, he said, "I'm
   going to actually pause on this issue, because a lot of people have
   been saying this lately on every problem, which is just, `Sign an
   executive order and we can pretty much do anything and basically
   nullify Congress.' "

   Many in the crowd applauded their approval. Yes! Nullify it! Although
   Obama has infuriated the right with relatively modest executive orders
   on gun control and some stronger ones on climate change, he has issued
   the fewest of any modern President, except George H. W. Bush.

   "Wait, wait, wait," Obama said. "Before everybody starts clapping,
   that's not how it works. We've got this Constitution, we've got this
   whole thing about separation of powers. So there is no shortcut to
   politics, and there's no shortcut to democracy." The applause was
   hardly ecstatic. Everyone knew what he meant. The promises in the
   second inaugural could be a long time coming.

IV--THE WELCOME TABLE

   For every flight aboard Air Force One, there is a new name card at each
   seat; a catalogue of the Presidential Entertainment Library, with its
   hiply curated choices of movies and music; baskets of fruit and candy;
   a menu. Obama is generally a spare eater; the Air Force One menu seems
   designed for William Howard Taft. Breakfast one morning was "pumpkin
   spiced French toast drizzled with caramel syrup and a dollop of fresh
   whipped cream. Served with scrambled eggs and maple sausage links."
   Plus juice, coffee, and, on the side, a "creamy vanilla yogurt layered
   with blackberries and cinnamon graham crackers."

   The most curious character on the plane was Marvin Nicholson, a tall,
   rangy man in his early forties who works as the President's trip
   director and ubiquitous factotum. He is six feet eight. Nicholson is
   the guy who is always around, who carries the bag and the jacket, who
   squeezes Purell onto the Presidential palms after a rope line or a
   clutch; he is the one who has the pens, the briefing books, the
   Nicorette, the Sharpies, the Advil, the throat lozenges, the iPad, the
   iPod, the protein bars, the bottle of Black Forest Berry Honest Tea. He
   and the President toss a football around, they shoot baskets, they
   shoot the shit. In his twenties, Nicholson was living in Boston and
   working as a bartender and as a clerk in a windsurfing-equipment shop,
   where he met John Kerry. He moved to Nantucket and worked as a caddie.
   He carried the Senator's clubs and Kerry invited him to come to D.C.
   Since taking the job with Obama, in 2009, Nicholson has played golf
   with the President well over a hundred times. The Speaker of the House
   has played with him once.

   A fact like this can seem to chime with the sort of complaints you hear
   all the time about Obama, particularly along the Acela Corridor. He is
   said to be a reluctant politician: aloof, insular, diffident, arrogant,
   inert, unwilling to jolly his allies along the fairway and take a
   9-iron to his enemies. He doesn't know anyone in Congress. No one in
   the House or in the Senate, no one in foreign capitals fears him. He
   gives a great speech, but he doesn't understand power. He is a poor
   executive. Doesn't it seem as if he hates the job? And so on. This is
   the knowing talk on Wall Street, on K Street, on Capitol Hill, in green
   rooms--the "Morning Joe" consensus.

   There are other ways to assess the political skills of a President who
   won two terms, as only seventeen of forty-four Presidents have, and did
   so as a black man, with an African father and a peculiar name, one
   consonant away from that of the world's most notorious terrorist. From
   the start, however, the political operatives who opposed him did what
   they are paid to do--they drew a cartoon of him. "Even if you never met
   him, you know this guy," Karl Rove said, in 2008. "He's the guy at the
   country club with the beautiful date, holding a Martini and a
   cigarette, that stands against the wall and makes snide comments about
   everyone who passes by." The less malign version is of a President who
   is bafflingly serene, as committed to his duties as a husband and
   father--six-thirty family dinner upstairs in the private residence is
   considered "sacrosanct," aides say--as he is to his duties as
   Cajoler-in-Chief.

   Still, Obama's reluctance to break bread on a regular basis with his
   congressional allies is real, and a source of tribal mystification in
   Washington. "Politics was a strange career choice for Obama," David
   Frum, a conservative columnist, told me. "Most politicians are not the
   kind of people you would choose to have as friends. Or they are the
   kind who, like John Edwards, seem to be one thing but then turn out to
   have a monster in the attic; the friendship is contingent on something
   you can't see. Obama is exactly like all my friends. He would rather
   read a book than spend time with people he doesn't know or like." Joe
   Manchin, a Democrat from West Virginia who was elected to the Senate
   three years ago, said recently that Obama's distance from members of
   Congress has hurt his ability to pass legislation. "When you don't
   build those personal relationships," Manchin told CNN, "it's pretty
   easy for a person to say, `Well, let me think about it.' "

   Harry Truman once called the White House "the great white jail," but
   few Presidents seem to have felt as oppressed by Washington as Obama
   does. At one stop on the West Coast trip, Marta Kauffman, a Democratic
   bundler who was one of the creators of "Friends," said that she asked
   him what had surprised him most when he first became President. "The
   bubble," Obama said. He said he hoped that one day he might be able to
   take a walk in the park, drop by a bookstore, chat with people in a
   coffee shop. "After all this is done," he said, "how can I find that
   again?"

   "Have you considered a wig?" she asked.

   "Maybe fake dreads," her son added.

   The President smiled. "I never thought of that," he said.
   [56]Cartoon "Now, understand, I'm not suggesting that you actually do
   anything with any of these tools."
     * [57]Share
     * [58]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [59]Buy a cartoon

   Obama's circle of intimates is limited; it has been since his days at
   Columbia and Harvard Law. In 2008, Obama called on John Podesta, who
   had worked extensively for Bill Clinton, to run his transition process.
   When Clinton took office, there was a huge list of people who needed to
   be taken care of with jobs; the "friends of Bill" is a wide network.
   After Podesta talked to Obama and realized how few favors had to be
   distributed, he told a colleague, "He travels light."

   Obama's favorite company is a small ensemble of Chicago
   friends--Valerie Jarrett, Marty Nesbitt and his wife, Anita Blanchard,
   an obstetrician, and Eric and Cheryl Whitaker, prominent doctors on the
   South Side. During the first Presidential campaign, the Obamas took a
   vow of "no new friends."

   "There have been times where I've been constrained by the fact that I
   had two young daughters who I wanted to spend time with--and that I
   wasn't in a position to work the social scene in Washington," Obama
   told me. But, as Malia and Sasha have grown older, the Obamas have
   taken to hosting occasional off-the-record dinners in the residence
   upstairs at the White House. The guests ordinarily include a friendly
   political figure, a business leader, a journalist. Obama drinks a
   Martini or two (Rove was right about that), and he and the First Lady
   are welcoming, funny, and warm. The dinners start at six. At around
   ten-thirty at one dinner last spring, the guests assumed the evening
   was winding down. But when Obama was asked whether they should leave,
   he laughed and said, "Hey, don't go! I'm a night owl! Have another
   drink." The party went on past 1 A.M.

   At the dinners with historians, Obama sometimes asks his guests to talk
   about their latest work. On one occasion, Doris Kearns Goodwin talked
   about what became "The Bully Pulpit," which is a study, in part, of the
   way that Theodore Roosevelt deployed his relentlessly gregarious
   personality and his close relations with crusading journalists to
   political advantage. The portrait of T.R. muscling obstreperous foes on
   the issue of inequality--particularly the laissez-faire dinosaurs in
   his own party, the G.O.P.--couldn't fail to summon a contrasting
   portrait.

   The biographer Robert Caro has also been a guest. Caro's ongoing
   volumes about Lyndon Johnson portray a President who used everything
   from the promise of appointment to bald-faced political threats to win
   passage of the legislative agenda that had languished under John
   Kennedy, including Medicare, a tax cut, and a civil-rights bill.
   Publicly, Johnson said of Kennedy, "I had to take the dead man's
   program and turn it into a martyr's cause." Privately, he disdained
   Kennedy's inability to get his program through Congress, cracking,
   according to Caro, that Kennedy's men knew less about politics on the
   Hill "than an old maid does about fucking." Senator Richard Russell,
   Jr., of Georgia, admitted that he and his Dixiecrat colleagues in the
   Senate could resist Kennedy "but not Lyndon": "That man will twist your
   arm off at the shoulder and beat your head in with it."

   Obama delivers no such beatings. Last April, when, in the wake of the
   mass shootings in Newtown, Connecticut, eighty-three per cent of
   Americans declared themselves in favor of background checks for gun
   purchases, the Times ran a prominent article making the case that the
   Senate failed to follow the President's lead at least partly because of
   his passivity as a tactical politician. It described how Mark Begich, a
   Democratic senator from Alaska, had asked for, and received, a crucial
   favor from the White House, but then, four weeks later, when Begich
   voted against the bill on background checks, he paid no price. No one
   shut down any highway lanes in Anchorage; no Presidential fury was felt
   in Juneau or the Brooks Range. The historian Robert Dallek, another
   guest at the President's table, told the Times that Obama was "inclined
   to believe that sweet reason is what you need to use with people in
   high office."

   Yet Obama and his aides regard all such talk of breaking bread and
   breaking legs as wishful fantasy. They maintain that they could invite
   every Republican in Congress to play golf until the end of time, could
   deliver punishments with ruthless regularity--and never cut the Gordian
   knot of contemporary Washington. They have a point. An Alaska Democrat
   like Begich would never last in office had he voted with Obama. L.B.J.,
   elected in a landslide victory in 1964, drew on whopping majorities in
   both houses of Congress. He could exploit ideological diversity within
   the parties and the lax regulations on earmarks and pork-barrel
   spending. "When he lost that historic majority, and the glow of that
   landslide victory faded, he had the same problems with Congress that
   most Presidents at one point or another have," Obama told me. "I say
   that not to suggest that I'm a master wheeler-dealer but, rather, to
   suggest that there are some structural institutional realities to our
   political system that don't have much to do with schmoozing."

   Dallek said, "Johnson could sit with Everett Dirksen, the Republican
   leader, kneecap to kneecap, drinking bourbon and branch water, and
   Dirksen would mention that there was a fine young man in his state who
   would be a fine judge, and the deal would be cut. Nowadays, the media
   would know in an instant and rightly yell `Corruption!'  "

   Caro finds the L.B.J.-B.H.O. comparison ludicrous. "Johnson was
   unique," he said. "We have never had anyone like him, as a legislative
   genius. I'm working on his Presidency now. Wait till you see what he
   does to get Medicare, the Civil Rights Act, and the Voting Rights Act
   through. But is Obama a poor practitioner of power? I have a different
   opinion. No matter what the problems with the rollout of Obamacare,
   it's a major advance in the history of social justice to provide access
   to health care for thirty-one million people."
   [60]Cartoon
     * [61]Share
     * [62]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [63]Buy a cartoon

   At the most recent dinner he attended at the White House, Caro had the
   distinct impression that Obama was cool to him, annoyed, perhaps, at
   the notion appearing in the press that his latest Johnson volume was an
   implicit rebuke to him. "As we were leaving, I said to Obama, `You
   know, my book wasn't an unspoken attack on you, it's a book about
   Lyndon Johnson,' " Caro recalled. L.B.J. was, after all, also the
   President who made the catastrophic decision to deepen America's
   involvement in the quagmire of Vietnam. "Obama seems interested in
   winding down our foreign wars," Caro said approvingly.

   When Obama does ask Republicans to a social occasion, he is sometimes
   rebuffed. In the fall of 2012, he organized a screening at the White
   House of Steven Spielberg's film "Lincoln." Spielberg, the cast, and
   the Democratic leadership found the time to come. Mitch McConnell, John
   Boehner, and three other Republicans declined their invitations,
   pleading the press of congressional business. In the current climate, a
   Republican, especially one facing challenges at home from the right,
   risks more than he gains by socializing or doing business with Obama.
   Boehner may be prepared to compromise on certain issues, but it looks
   better for him if he is seen to be making a deal with Harry Reid, in
   the Senate, than with Barack Obama. Obama's people say that the
   President's attitude is, Fine, so long as we get there. Help me to help
   you.

   When I asked Obama if he had read or seen anything that fully captured
   the experience of being in his office, he laughed, as if to say, You
   just have no idea. "The truth is, in popular culture the President is
   usually a side character and a lot of times is pretty dull," he said.
   "If it's a paranoid conspiracy-theory movie, then there's an evil aide
   who is carrying something out. If it's a good President, then he is
   all-wise and all-knowing"--like the characters played by Martin Sheen
   in "The West Wing," and Michael Douglas in "The American President."
   Obama says that he is neither. "I'll tell you that watching `Lincoln'
   was interesting, in part because you watched what obviously was a
   fictionalized account of the President I most admire, and there was
   such a gap between him and me that it made you want to be better." He
   spoke about envying Lincoln's "capacity to speak to and move the
   country without simplifying, and at the most fundamental of levels."
   But what struck him most, he said, was precisely what his critics think
   he most avoids--"the messiness of getting something done."

   He went on, "The real politics resonated with me, because I have yet to
   see something that we've done, or any President has done, that was
   really important and good, that did not involve some mess and some
   strong-arming and some shading of how it was initially talked about to
   a particular member of the legislature who you needed a vote from.
   Because, if you're doing big, hard things, then there is going to be
   some hair on it--there's going to be some aspects of it that aren't
   clean and neat and immediately elicit applause from everybody. And so
   the nature of not only politics but, I think, social change of any sort
   is that it doesn't move in a straight line, and that those who are most
   successful typically are tacking like a sailor toward a particular
   direction but have to take into account winds and currents and
   occasionally the lack of any wind, so that you're just sitting there
   for a while, and sometimes you're being blown all over the place."

   The politician sensitive to winds and currents was visible in Obama's
   coy talk of his "evolving" position on gay marriage. Obama conceded in
   one of our later conversations only that it's "fair to say that I may
   have come to that realization slightly before I actually made the
   announcement" favoring gay marriage, in May of 2012. "But this was not
   a situation where I kind of did a wink and a nod and a
   hundred-and-eighty-degree turn." The turn may not have been a sudden
   one-eighty; to say that your views are "evolving," though, is to say
   there is a position that you consider to be more advanced than the one
   you officially hold. And he held the "evolved" position in 1996, when,
   as a candidate for the Illinois state senate, he filled out a
   questionnaire from Outlines, a local gay and lesbian newspaper, saying,
   "I favor legalizing same-sex marriages."

   When I asked Obama about another area of shifting public opinion--the
   legalization of marijuana--he seemed even less eager to evolve with any
   dispatch and get in front of the issue. "As has been well documented, I
   smoked pot as a kid, and I view it as a bad habit and a vice, not very
   different from the cigarettes that I smoked as a young person up
   through a big chunk of my adult life. I don't think it is more
   dangerous than alcohol."

   Is it less dangerous? I asked.

   Obama leaned back and let a moment go by. That's one of his moves. When
   he is interviewed, particularly for print, he has the habit of slowing
   himself down, and the result is a spool of cautious lucidity. He speaks
   in paragraphs and with moments of revision. Sometimes he will stop in
   the middle of a sentence and say, "Scratch that," or, "I think the
   grammar was all screwed up in that sentence, so let me start again."
   [64]Cartoon "Sure, Liz, come on up for a drink! And don't mind the
   place--it's a bit of a crime scene right now."
     * [65]Share
     * [66]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [67]Buy a cartoon

   Less dangerous, he said, "in terms of its impact on the individual
   consumer. It's not something I encourage, and I've told my daughters I
   think it's a bad idea, a waste of time, not very healthy." What clearly
   does trouble him is the radically disproportionate arrests and
   incarcerations for marijuana among minorities. "Middle-class kids don't
   get locked up for smoking pot, and poor kids do," he said. "And
   African-American kids and Latino kids are more likely to be poor and
   less likely to have the resources and the support to avoid unduly harsh
   penalties." But, he said, "we should not be locking up kids or
   individual users for long stretches of jail time when some of the folks
   who are writing those laws have probably done the same thing."
   Accordingly, he said of the legalization of marijuana in Colorado and
   Washington that "it's important for it to go forward because it's
   important for society not to have a situation in which a large portion
   of people have at one time or another broken the law and only a select
   few get punished."

   As is his habit, he nimbly argued the other side. "Having said all
   that, those who argue that legalizing marijuana is a panacea and it
   solves all these social problems I think are probably overstating the
   case. There is a lot of hair on that policy. And the experiment that's
   going to be taking place in Colorado and Washington is going to be, I
   think, a challenge." He noted the slippery-slope arguments that might
   arise. "I also think that, when it comes to harder drugs, the harm done
   to the user is profound and the social costs are profound. And you do
   start getting into some difficult line-drawing issues. If marijuana is
   fully legalized and at some point folks say, Well, we can come up with
   a negotiated dose of cocaine that we can show is not any more harmful
   than vodka, are we open to that? If somebody says, We've got a finely
   calibrated dose of meth, it isn't going to kill you or rot your teeth,
   are we O.K. with that?"

V--MAGIC KINGDOMS

   By Monday night, Obama was in Los Angeles, headed for Beverly Park, a
   gated community of private-equity barons, Saudi princes, and movie
   people. It was a night of fund-raisers--the first hosted by Magic
   Johnson, who led the Lakers to five N.B.A. championships, in the
   eighties. In the Beast, on the way to Johnson's house, Obama told me,
   "Magic has become a good friend. I always tease him--I think he
   supported Hillary the first time around, in '08."

   "He campaigned for her in Iowa!" Josh Earnest, a press spokesman, said,
   still sounding chagrined.

   "Yeah, but we have developed a great relationship," Obama said. "I
   wasn't a Lakers fan. I was a Philadelphia 76ers fan, because I loved
   Doctor J."--Julius Erving--"and then became a Jordan fan, because I
   moved to Chicago. But, in my mind, at least, what has made Magic heroic
   was not simply the joy of his playing." Obama said that the way Johnson
   handled his H.I.V. diagnosis changed "how the culture thought about
   that--which, actually, I think, ultimately had an impact about how the
   culture thought about the gay community." He also talked about
   Johnson's business success as something that was "deeply admired" among
   African-Americans--"the notion that here's somebody who would leverage
   fame and fortune in sports into a pretty remarkable business career."

   "Do you not see that often enough, by your lights?" I asked.

   "I don't," Obama said.

   The Obamas are able to speak to people of color in a way that none of
   their predecessors could. And the President is quick to bring into the
   public realm the fact that, for all his personal cool, he is a
   foursquare family man. He has plenty of hip-hop on his iPod, but he
   also worries about the moments of misogyny. Once, I mentioned to him
   that I knew that while Malia Obama, an aspiring filmmaker, was a fan of
   "Girls," he and Michelle Obama were, at first, wary of the show.

   "I'm at the very young end of the Baby Boom generation, which meant
   that I did not come of age in the sixties--took for granted certain
   freedoms, certain attitudes about gender, sexuality, equality for
   women, but didn't feel as if I was having to rebel against something,"
   Obama said. "Precisely because I didn't have a father in the home and
   moved around a lot as a kid and had a wonderfully loving mom and
   grandparents, but not a lot of structure growing up, I emerged on the
   other side of that with an appreciation for family and marriage and
   structure for the kids. I'm sure that's part of why Michelle and her
   family held such appeal to me in the first place, because she did grow
   up with that kind of structure. And now, as parents, I don't think
   we're being particularly conservative--we're actually not prudes. . . .
   But, as parents, what we have seen, both in our own family and among
   our friends, is that kids with structure have an easier time of it."

   He talked about a visit that he made last year to Hyde Park Academy, a
   public high school on Chicago's South Side, where he met with a group
   of about twenty boys in a program called Becoming a Man. "They're in
   this program because they're fundamentally good kids who could tip in
   the wrong direction if they didn't get some guidance and some
   structure," Obama recalled. "We went around the room and started
   telling each other stories. And one of the young men asked me about me
   growing up, and I explained, You know what? I'm just like you guys. I
   didn't have a dad. There were times where I was angry and wasn't sure
   why I was angry. I engaged in a bunch of anti-social behavior. I did
   drugs. I got drunk. Didn't take school seriously. The only difference
   between me and you is that I was in a more forgiving environment, and
   if I made a mistake I wasn't going to get shot. And, even if I didn't
   apply myself in school, I was at a good enough school that just through
   osmosis I'd have the opportunity to go to college.
   [68]Cartoon "I just wanted you to hear it from me first, before you
   read it in the sky."
     * [69]Share
     * [70]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [71]Buy a cartoon

   "And, as I'm speaking, the kid next to me looks over and he says, `Are
   you talking about you?' And there was a benefit for them hearing that,
   because when I then said, You guys have to take yourselves more
   seriously, or you need to have a backup plan in case you don't end up
   being LeBron or Jay Z . . . they might listen. Now, that's not a
   liberal or a conservative thing. There have been times where some
   thoughtful and sometimes not so thoughtful African-American
   commentators have gotten on both Michelle and me, suggesting that we
   are not addressing enough sort of institutional barriers and racism,
   and we're engaging in sort of up-by-the-bootstraps, Booker T.
   Washington messages that let the larger society off the hook." Obama
   thought that this reaction was sometimes knee-jerk. "I always tell
   people to go read some of Dr. King's writings about the
   African-American community. For that matter, read Malcolm X. . . .
   There's no contradiction to say that there are issues of personal
   responsibility that have to be addressed, while still acknowledging
   that some of the specific pathologies in the African-American community
   are a direct result of our history."

   The higher we went up into Beverly Hills, the grander the houses were.
   This was where the big donors lived. But Obama's thoughts have been
   down in the city. The drama of racial inequality, in his mind, has come
   to presage a larger, transracial form of economic disparity, a
   deepening of the class divide. Indeed, if there is a theme for the
   remaining days of his term, it is inequality. In 2011, he went to
   Osawatomie, Kansas, the site of Theodore Roosevelt's 1910 New
   Nationalism speech--a signal moment in the history of
   Progressivism--and declared inequality the "defining issue of our
   time." He repeated the message at length, late last year, in Anacostia,
   one of the poorest neighborhoods in Washington, D.C., this time noting
   that the gap between the rich and the poor in America now resembled
   that in Argentina and Jamaica, rather than that in France, Germany, or
   Canada. American C.E.O.s once made, on average, thirty times as much as
   workers; now they make about two hundred and seventy times as much. The
   wealthy hire lobbyists; they try to secure their interests with
   campaign donations. Even as Obama travels for campaign alms and is as
   entangled in the funding system at least as much as any other
   politician, he insists that his commitment is to the middle class and
   the disadvantaged. Last summer, he received a letter from a single
   mother struggling to support herself and her daughter on a minimal
   income. She was drowning: "I need help. I can't imagine being out in
   the streets with my daughter and if I don't get some type of relief
   soon, I'm afraid that's what may happen." "Copy to Senior Advisers,"
   Obama wrote at the bottom of the letter. "This is the person we are
   working for."

   In one of our conversations, I asked him what he felt he must get done
   before leaving office. He was silent for a while and then broke into a
   pained grin. "You mean, now that the Web site is working?" Yes, after
   that. "It's hard to anticipate events over the next three years," he
   said. "If you had asked F.D.R. what he had to accomplish in 1937, he
   would have told you, `I've got to stabilize the economy and reduce the
   deficit.' Turned out there were a few more things on his plate." He
   went on, "I think we are fortunate at the moment that we do not face a
   crisis of the scale and scope that Lincoln or F.D.R. faced. So I think
   it's unrealistic to suggest that I can narrow my focus the way those
   two Presidents did. But I can tell you that I will measure myself at
   the end of my Presidency in large part by whether I began the process
   of rebuilding the middle class and the ladders into the middle class,
   and reversing the trend toward economic bifurcation in this society."

   Obama met last summer with Robert Putnam, a Harvard political scientist
   who became famous for a book he wrote on social atomization, "Bowling
   Alone." For the past several years, Putnam and some colleagues have
   been working on a book about the growing opportunity gap between rich
   and poor kids. Putnam, who led a Kennedy School seminar on civic
   engagement that Obama was in, sent the President a memo about his
   findings. More and more, Putnam found, the crucial issue is class, and
   he believes that a black President might have an easier time explaining
   this trend to the American people and setting an agenda to combat it.
   Other prominent politicians--including Hillary Clinton, Paul Ryan, and
   Jeb Bush--have also consulted Putnam. Putnam told me that, even if
   legislation combatting the widening class divide eludes Obama, "I am
   hoping he can be John the Baptist on this." And Obama, for his part,
   seems eager to take on that evangelizing role.

   "You have an economy," Obama told me, "that is ruthlessly squeezing
   workers and imposing efficiencies that make our flat-screen TVs really
   cheap but also puts enormous downward pressure on wages and salaries.
   That's making it more and more difficult not only for African-Americans
   or Latinos to get a foothold into the middle class but for
   everybody--large majorities of people--to get a foothold in the middle
   class or to feel secure there. You've got folks like Bob Putnam, who's
   doing some really interesting studies indicating the degree to which
   some of those `pathologies' that used to be attributed to the
   African-American community in particular--single-parent households, and
   drug abuse, and men dropping out of the labor force, and an underground
   economy--you're now starting to see in larger numbers in white
   working-class communities as well, which would tend to vindicate what I
   think a lot of us always felt."

VI--A NEW EQUILIBRIUM

   After the event at Magic Johnson's  place--the highlight was a tour of
   an immense basement trophy room, where Johnson had installed a gleaming
   hardwood basketball floor and piped in the sound of crowds cheering and
   announcers declaring the glories of the Lakers--the Beast made its way
   to the compound that the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers built. Haim
   Saban, who made his billions as a self-described "cartoon schlepper,"
   was born in Egypt, came of age in Israel, and started his show-business
   career as the bass player in the Lions of Judah. His politics are not
   ambiguous. "I am a one-issue guy," he once said, "and my issue is
   Israel." His closest political relationship is with Bill and Hillary
   Clinton, and he was crushed when she lost to Obama, in 2008. Saban
   publicly expressed doubts about whether Obama was sufficiently ardent
   about Israel, but he has come around.
   [72]Cartoon "From now on, you're Curious-but-Respectful-of-Boundaries
   George."
     * [73]Share
     * [74]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [75]Buy a cartoon

   The main house on Saban's property is less of an art museum than Jon
   Shirley's, though it features a Warhol diptych of Golda Meir and Albert
   Einstein over the fireplace. The fund-raiser was held in back of the
   main house, under a tent. Addressing a hundred and twenty guests, and
   being peppered with questions about the Middle East, Obama trotted
   around all the usual bases--the hope for peace, the still strong
   alliance with Israel, the danger of "lone wolf" terror threats. But,
   while a man who funds the Saban Center for Middle East Policy at the
   Brookings Institution may have warmed to Obama, there is no question
   that, in certain professional foreign-policy circles, Obama is often
   regarded with mistrust. His Syria policy--with its dubious "red line"
   and threats to get rid of Bashar al-Assad; with John Kerry's improvised
   press-conference gambit on chemical weapons--has inspired little
   confidence. Neither did the decision to accelerate troop levels in
   Afghanistan and, at the same time, schedule a withdrawal.

   Obama came to power without foreign-policy experience; but he won the
   election, in part, by advocating a foreign-policy sensibility that was
   wary of American overreach. If George W. Bush's foreign policy was
   largely a reaction to 9/11, Obama's has been a reaction to the
   reaction. He withdrew American forces from Iraq. He went to Cairo in
   2009, in an attempt to forge "a new beginning" between the United
   States and the Muslim world. American troops will come home from
   Afghanistan this year. As he promised in his first Presidential
   campaign--to the outraged protests of Hillary Clinton and John McCain
   alike--he has extended a hand to traditional enemies, from Iran to
   Cuba. And he has not hesitated in his public rhetoric to acknowledge,
   however subtly, the abuses, as well as the triumphs, of American power.
   He remembers going with his mother to live in Indonesia, in
   1967--shortly after a military coup, engineered with American help, led
   to the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of people. This event, and
   the fact that so few Americans know much about it, made a lasting
   impression on Obama. He is convinced that an essential component of
   diplomacy is the public recognition of historical facts--not only the
   taking of American hostages in Iran, in 1979, but also the American
   role in the overthrow of Mohammad Mossadegh, the democratically elected
   Prime Minister of Iran, in 1953.

   The right's response has been to accuse Obama of conducting a foreign
   policy of apology. Last year, Republican senators on the Foreign
   Affairs Committee, including Marco Rubio, of Florida, demanded to know
   if Samantha Power, Obama's nominee for U.N. Ambassador and the author
   of "A Problem from Hell," a historical indictment of American passivity
   in the face of various genocides around the world, would ever
   "apologize" for the United States. (In a depressing Kabuki drama, Power
   seemed forced to prove her patriotic bona fides by insisting repeatedly
   that the U.S. was "the greatest country on earth" and that, no, she
   would "never apologize" for it.) Obama's conservative critics, both at
   home and abroad, paint him as a President out to diminish American
   power. Josef Joffe, the hawkish editor of Die Zeit, the highbrow German
   weekly, told me, "There is certainly consistency and coherence in his
   attempt to retract from the troubles of the world, to get the U.S. out
   of harm's way, in order to do `a little nation-building at home,' as he
   has so often put it. If you want to be harsh about it, he wants to turn
   the U.S. into a very large medium power, into an XXL France or
   Germany."

   Obama's "long game" on foreign policy calls for traditional categories
   of American power and ideology to be reordered. Ben Rhodes, the deputy
   national-security adviser for strategic communications, told me that
   Washington was "trapped in very stale narratives."

   "In the foreign-policy establishment, to be an idealist you have to be
   for military intervention," Rhodes went on. "In the Democratic Party,
   these debates were defined in the nineties, and the idealists lined up
   for military intervention. For the President, Iraq was the defining
   issue, and now Syria is viewed through that lens, as was Libya--to be
   an idealist, you have to be a military interventionist. We spent a
   trillion dollars in Iraq and had troops there for a decade, and you
   can't say it wielded positive influence. Just the opposite. We can't
   seem to get out of these boxes."

   Obama may resist the idealism of a previous generation of
   interventionists, but his realism, if that's what it is, diverges from
   the realism of Henry Kissinger or Brent Scowcroft. "It comes from the
   idea that change is organic and change comes to countries in its own
   way, modernization comes in its own way, rather than through liberation
   narratives coming from the West," Fareed Zakaria, a writer on foreign
   policy whom Obama reads and consults, says. Anne-Marie Slaughter, who
   worked at the State Department as Hillary Clinton's director of policy
   planning, says, "Obama has a real understanding of the limits of our
   power. It's not that the United States is in decline; it's that
   sometimes the world has problems without the tools to fix them."
   Members of Obama's foreign-policy circle say that when he is criticized
   for his reaction to situations like Iran's Green Revolution, in 2009,
   or the last days of Hosni Mubarak's regime, in 2011, he complains that
   people imagine him to have a "joystick" that allows him to manipulate
   precise outcomes.

   Obama told me that what he needs isn't any new grand strategy--"I don't
   really even need George Kennan right now"--but, rather, the right
   strategic partners. "There are currents in history and you have to
   figure out how to move them in one direction or another," Rhodes said.
   "You can't necessarily determine the final destination. . . . The
   President subscribes less to a great-man theory of history and more to
   a great-movement theory of history--that change happens when people
   force it or circumstances do." (Later, Obama told me, "I'm not sure Ben
   is right about that. I believe in both.")

   The President may scorn the joystick fantasy, but he does believe that
   his words--at microphones from Cairo to Yangon--can encourage positive
   change abroad, even if only in the long run. In Israel last March, he
   told university students that "political leaders will never take risks
   if the people do not push them to take some risks." Obama, who has
   pressed Netanyahu to muster the political will to take risks on his
   own, thinks he can help "create a space"--that is the term around the
   White House--for forward movement on the Palestinian issue, whether he
   is around to see the result or not.
   [76]Cartoon "How much weight can it hold?"
     * [77]Share
     * [78]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [79]Buy a cartoon

   Administration officials are convinced that their efforts to toughen
   the sanctions on Iran caused tremendous economic pain and helped Hassan
   Rouhani win popular support in the Iranian Presidential elections last
   year. Although Rouhani is no liberal--he has revolutionary and
   religious credentials, which is why he was able to run--he was not
   Ayatollah Ali Khamenei's favored candidate. Khamenei is an opaque,
   cautious figure, Administration officials say, but he clearly acceded
   to Rouhani as he saw the political demands of the population shift.

   The nuclear negotiations in Geneva, which were preceded by secret
   contacts with the Iranians in Oman and New York, were, from Obama's
   side, based on a series of strategic calculations that, he
   acknowledges, may not work out. As the Administration sees it, an
   Iranian nuclear weapon would be a violation of the Nuclear
   Nonproliferation Treaty, and a threat to the entire region; it could
   spark a nuclear arms race reaching Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Turkey.
   (Israel has had nukes since 1967.) But the White House is prepared to
   accept a civilian nuclear capacity in Iran, with strict oversight,
   while the Israelis and the Gulf states regard any Iranian nuclear
   technology at all as unacceptable. Obama has told Netanyahu and
   Republican senators that the absolutist benchmark is not achievable.
   Members of Obama's team believe that the leaders of Israel, Egypt,
   Jordan, and the Gulf states, who are now allied as never before, want
   the U.S. to be their proxy in a struggle not merely for
   de-nuclearization in Iran but for regime change--and that is not on the
   Administration's agenda, except, perhaps, as a hope.

   Republican and Democratic senators have expressed doubts about even the
   interim agreement with Iran, and have threatened to tighten sanctions
   still further. "Historically, there is hostility and suspicion toward
   Iran, not just among members of Congress but the American people,"
   Obama said, adding that "members of Congress are very attentive to what
   Israel says on its security issues." He went on, "I don't think a new
   sanctions bill will reach my desk during this period, but, if it did, I
   would veto it and expect it to be sustained."

   Ultimately, he envisages a new geopolitical equilibrium, one less
   turbulent than the current landscape of civil war, terror, and
   sectarian battle. "It would be profoundly in the interest of citizens
   throughout the region if Sunnis and Shias weren't intent on killing
   each other," he told me. "And although it would not solve the entire
   problem, if we were able to get Iran to operate in a responsible
   fashion--not funding terrorist organizations, not trying to stir up
   sectarian discontent in other countries, and not developing a nuclear
   weapon--you could see an equilibrium developing between Sunni, or
   predominantly Sunni, Gulf states and Iran in which there's competition,
   perhaps suspicion, but not an active or proxy warfare.

   "With respect to Israel, the interests of Israel in stability and
   security are actually very closely aligned with the interests of the
   Sunni states." As Saudi and Israeli diplomats berate Obama in unison,
   his reaction is, essentially, Use that. "What's preventing them from
   entering into even an informal alliance with at least normalized
   diplomatic relations is not that their interests are profoundly in
   conflict but the Palestinian issue, as well as a long history of
   anti-Semitism that's developed over the course of decades there, and
   anti-Arab sentiment that's increased inside of Israel based on seeing
   buses being blown up," Obama said. "If you can start unwinding some of
   that, that creates a new equilibrium. And so I think each individual
   piece of the puzzle is meant to paint a picture in which conflicts and
   competition still exist in the region but that it is contained, it is
   expressed in ways that don't exact such an enormous toll on the
   countries involved, and that allow us to work with functioning states
   to prevent extremists from emerging there."

   During Obama's performance under Saban's tent, there was no talk of a
   Sunni-Israeli alignment, or of any failures of vision on Netanyahu's
   part. Obama did allow himself to be testy about the criticism he has
   received over his handling of the carnage in Syria. "You'll recall that
   that was the previous end of my Presidency, until it turned out that we
   are actually getting all the chemical weapons. And no one reports on
   that anymore."

VII--HAMMERS AND PLIERS

   Obama's lowest moments in the Middle East have involved his handling of
   Syria. Last summer, when I visited Za'atari, the biggest Syrian refugee
   camp in Jordan, one displaced person after another expressed anger and
   dismay at American inaction. In a later conversation, I asked Obama if
   he was haunted by Syria, and, though the mask of his equipoise rarely
   slips, an indignant expression crossed his face. "I am haunted by
   what's happened," he said. "I am not haunted by my decision not to
   engage in another Middle Eastern war. It is very difficult to imagine a
   scenario in which our involvement in Syria would have led to a better
   outcome, short of us being willing to undertake an effort in size and
   scope similar to what we did in Iraq. And when I hear people suggesting
   that somehow if we had just financed and armed the opposition earlier,
   that somehow Assad would be gone by now and we'd have a peaceful
   transition, it's magical thinking.
   [80]Cartoon November 1, 2010
     * [81]Share
     * [82]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [83]Buy a cartoon

   "It's not as if we didn't discuss this extensively down in the
   Situation Room. It's not as if we did not solicit--and continue to
   solicit--opinions from a wide range of folks. Very early in this
   process, I actually asked the C.I.A. to analyze examples of America
   financing and supplying arms to an insurgency in a country that
   actually worked out well. And they couldn't come up with much. We have
   looked at this from every angle. And the truth is that the challenge
   there has been, and continues to be, that you have an authoritarian,
   brutal government who is willing to do anything to hang on to power,
   and you have an opposition that is disorganized, ill-equipped,
   ill-trained, and is self-divided. All of that is on top of some of the
   sectarian divisions. . . . And, in that environment, our best chance of
   seeing a decent outcome at this point is to work the state actors who
   have invested so much in keeping Assad in power--mainly the Iranians
   and the Russians--as well as working with those who have been financing
   the opposition to make sure that they're not creating the kind of
   extremist force that we saw emerge out of Afghanistan when we were
   financing the mujahideen."

   At the core of Obama's thinking is that American military involvement
   cannot be the primary instrument to achieve the new equilibrium that
   the region so desperately needs. And yet thoughts of a pacific
   equilibrium are far from anyone's mind in the real, existing Middle
   East. In the 2012 campaign, Obama spoke not only of killing Osama bin
   Laden; he also said that Al Qaeda had been "decimated." I pointed out
   that the flag of Al Qaeda is now flying in Falluja, in Iraq, and among
   various rebel factions in Syria; Al Qaeda has asserted a presence in
   parts of Africa, too.

   "The analogy we use around here sometimes, and I think is accurate, is
   if a jayvee team puts on Lakers uniforms that doesn't make them Kobe
   Bryant," Obama said, resorting to an uncharacteristically flip analogy.
   "I think there is a distinction between the capacity and reach of a bin
   Laden and a network that is actively planning major terrorist plots
   against the homeland versus jihadists who are engaged in various local
   power struggles and disputes, often sectarian.

   "Let's just keep in mind, Falluja is a profoundly conservative Sunni
   city in a country that, independent of anything we do, is deeply
   divided along sectarian lines. And how we think about terrorism has to
   be defined and specific enough that it doesn't lead us to think that
   any horrible actions that take place around the world that are
   motivated in part by an extremist Islamic ideology are a direct threat
   to us or something that we have to wade into."

   He went on, "You have a schism between Sunni and Shia throughout the
   region that is profound. Some of it is directed or abetted by states
   who are in contests for power there. You have failed states that are
   just dysfunctional, and various warlords and thugs and criminals are
   trying to gain leverage or a foothold so that they can control
   resources, populations, territory. . . . And failed states, conflict,
   refugees, displacement--all that stuff has an impact on our long-term
   security. But how we approach those problems and the resources that we
   direct toward those problems is not going to be exactly the same as how
   we think about a transnational network of operatives who want to blow
   up the World Trade Center. We have to be able to distinguish between
   these problems analytically, so that we're not using a pliers where we
   need a hammer, or we're not using a battalion when what we should be
   doing is partnering with the local government to train their police
   force more effectively, improve their intelligence capacities."

   This wasn't realism or idealism; it was something closer to policy
   particularism (this thing is different from that thing; Syria is not
   Libya; Iran is not North Korea). Yet Obama's regular deployment of
   drones has been criticized as a one-size-fits-all recourse, in which
   the prospect of destroying an individual enemy too easily trumps
   broader strategic and diplomatic considerations, to say nothing of
   moral ones. A few weeks before Obama left Washington to scour the West
   Coast for money, he invited to the White House Malala Yousafzai, the
   remarkable Pakistani teen-ager who campaigned for women's education and
   was shot in the head by the Taliban. Yousafzai thanked Obama for the
   material support that the U.S. government provided for education in
   Pakistan and Afghanistan and among Syrian refugees, but she also told
   him that drone strikes were "fuelling terrorism" and resentment in her
   country.

   "I think any President should be troubled by any war or any kinetic
   action that leads to death," Obama told me when I brought up
   Yousafzai's remarks. "The way I've thought about this issue is, I have
   a solemn duty and responsibility to keep the American people safe.
   That's my most important obligation as President and
   Commander-in-Chief. And there are individuals and groups out there that
   are intent on killing Americans--killing American civilians, killing
   American children, blowing up American planes. That's not speculation.
   It's their explicit agenda."

   Obama said that, if terrorists can be captured and prosecuted, "that's
   always my preference. If we can't, I cannot stand by and do nothing.
   They operate in places where oftentimes we cannot reach them, or the
   countries are either unwilling or unable to capture them in partnership
   with us. And that then narrows my options: we can simply be on defense
   and try to harden our defense. But in this day and age that's of
   limited--well, that's insufficient. We can say to those countries, as
   my predecessor did, if you are harboring terrorists, we will hold you
   accountable--in which case, we could be fighting a lot of wars around
   the world. And, statistically, it is indisputable that the costs in
   terms of not only our men and women in uniform but also innocent
   civilians would be much higher. Or, where possible, we can take
   targeted strikes, understanding that anytime you take a military strike
   there are risks involved. What I've tried to do is to tighten the
   process so much and limit the risks of civilian casualties so much that
   we have the least fallout from those actions. But it's not perfect."
   [84]Cartoon "Well, by that logic no one would ever shave a clock onto a
   monkey."September 13, 2010
     * [85]Share
     * [86]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [87]Buy a cartoon

   It is far from that. In December, an American drone flying above Al
   Bayda province, in Yemen, fired on what U.S. intelligence believed was
   a column of Al Qaeda fighters. The "column" was in fact a wedding
   party; twelve people were killed, and fifteen were seriously injured.
   Some of the victims, if not all, were civilians. This was no
   aberration. In Yemen and Pakistan, according to the Bureau of
   Investigative Journalism, American drones have killed between some four
   hundred and a thousand civilians--a civilian-to-combatant ratio that
   could be as high as one to three. Obama has never made it clear how the
   vast populations outraged and perhaps radicalized by such
   remote-control mayhem might figure into his calculations about American
   security.

   "Look, you wrestle with it," Obama said. "And those who have questioned
   our drone policy are doing exactly what should be done in a
   democracy--asking some tough questions. The only time I get frustrated
   is when folks act like it's not complicated and there aren't some real
   tough decisions, and are sanctimonious, as if somehow these aren't
   complicated questions. Listen, as I have often said to my
   national-security team, I didn't run for office so that I could go
   around blowing things up."

   Obama told me that in all three of his main initiatives in the
   region--with Iran, with Israel and the Palestinians, with Syria--the
   odds of completing final treaties are less than fifty-fifty. "On the
   other hand," he said, "in all three circumstances we may be able to
   push the boulder partway up the hill and maybe stabilize it so it
   doesn't roll back on us. And all three are connected. I do believe that
   the region is going through rapid change and inexorable change. Some of
   it is demographics; some of it is technology; some of it is economics.
   And the old order, the old equilibrium, is no longer tenable. The
   question then becomes, What's next?"

VIII--AMONG THE ALIENS

   On his last day in Los Angeles, Obama romanced Hollywood, taking a
   helicopter to visit the DreamWorks studio, in Glendale. Jeffrey
   Katzenberg, Obama's host and the head of DreamWorks Animation, is one
   of the Democrats' most successful fund-raisers. But it is never a good
   idea for the White House to admit to any quid pro quo. When one of the
   pool reporters asked why the President was going to Katzenberg's studio
   and not, say, Universal, a travelling spokesman replied, "DreamWorks
   obviously is a thriving business and is creating lots of jobs in
   Southern California. And the fact of the matter is Mr. Katzenberg's
   support for the President's policies has no bearing on our decision to
   visit there."

   That's pretty rich. Katzenberg has been a supporter from the start of
   Obama's national career, raising millions of dollars for him and for
   the Party's Super PACs. Nor has he been hurt by his political
   associations. Joe Biden helped pave the way with Xi Jinping and other
   officials so that DreamWorks and other Hollywood companies could build
   studios in China. (In an awkward postscript, the S.E.C. reportedly
   began investigating, in 2012, whether DreamWorks, Twentieth Century
   Fox, and the Walt Disney Company paid bribes to Chinese officials, in
   violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.)

   A flock of military helicopters brought the Obama party to Glendale,
   and, after a short ride to DreamWorks Animation, Katzenberg greeted the
   President and gave him a tour. They stopped in a basement recording
   studio to watch a voice-over session for a new animated picture called
   "Home," starring the voice of Steve Martin. Greeting Martin, Obama
   recalled that the last time they saw each other must have been when
   Martin played banjo with his band at the White House.

   Martin nodded. "I always say the fact that I played banjo at the White
   House was the biggest thrill of his life."

   Katzenberg explained that "Home" was the story of the Boov, an alien
   race that has taken over the planet. Martin is the voice of Captain
   Smek, the leader of the Boov.

   "Where did we go?" Obama asked Tim Johnson, the director. "Do they feed
   us?"

   "Mostly ice cream."

   Katzenberg said that, unlike dramatic films with live actors, nineteen
   out of twenty of DreamWorks' animated pictures succeed.

   "My kids have aged out," Obama said. "They used to be my excuse to
   watch them all."

   Katzenberg led Obama to a conference room, where the heads of most of
   the major movie and television studios were waiting. There would be
   touchy questions about business--particularly about the "North versus
   South" civil war in progress between the high-tech libertarians in
   Silicon Valley and the "content producers" in Los Angeles. The war was
   over intellectual-property rights, and Obama showed little desire to
   get in the middle of these two constituencies. If anything, he knows
   that Silicon Valley is ascendant, younger, more able to mobilize active
   voters, and he was not about to offer the studio heads his unqualified
   muscle.

   Finally, the subject switched to global matters. Alan Horn, the
   chairman of Walt Disney Studios, raised his hand. "First," he said, "I
   do recommend that you and your family see `Frozen,' which is coming to
   a theatre near you. "

   Then he asked about climate change.

IX--LISTENING IN

   On the flight back to Washington, Obama read and played spades with
   some aides to pass the time. (He and his former body man Reggie Love
   took a break to play spades at one point during the mission to kill
   Osama bin Laden.) After a while, one of the aides led me to the front
   cabin to talk with the President some more. The week before, Obama had
   given out the annual Presidential Medals of Freedom. One went to
   Benjamin C. Bradlee, the editor who built the Washington Post by
   joining the Times in publishing the Pentagon Papers, in 1971, and who
   stood behind Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein as they began publishing
   the Watergate exposés that led to the fall of the Nixon Presidency. I
   asked Obama how he could reconcile such an award with his
   Administration's aggressive leak investigations, which have ensnared
   journalists and sources, and its hostility to Edward Snowden's exposure
   of the N.S.A.'s blanket surveillance of American and foreign
   communications.
   [88]Cartoon "Use your inside voice."April 18, 2011
     * [89]Share
     * [90]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [91]Buy a cartoon

   After a long pause, Obama began to speak of how his first awareness of
   politics came when, as an eleven-year-old, he went on a cross-country
   bus trip with his mother and grandmother and, at the end of each day,
   watched the Watergate hearings on television. "I remember being
   fascinated by these figures and what was at stake, and the notion that
   even the President of the United States isn't above the law," he said.
   "And Sam Ervin with his eyebrows, and Inouye, this guy from Hawaii--it
   left a powerful impression on me. And so, as I got older, when I saw
   `All the President's Men,' that was the iconic vision of journalism
   telling truth to power, and making sure our democracy worked. And I
   still believe that. And so a lot of the tensions that have existed
   between my White House and the press are inherent in the institution.
   The press always wants more, and every White House, including ours, is
   trying to make sure that the things that we care most about are what's
   being reported on, and that we're not on any given day chasing after
   fifteen story lines."

   Then Obama insisted that what Snowden did was "not akin to Watergate or
   some scandal in which there were coverups involved." The leaks, he
   said, had "put people at risk" but revealed nothing illegal. And though
   the leaks raised "legitimate policy questions" about N.S.A. operations,
   "the issue then is: Is the only way to do that by giving some
   twenty-nine-year-old free rein to basically dump a mountain of
   information, much of which is definitely legal, definitely necessary
   for national security, and should properly be classified?" In Obama's
   view, "the benefit of the debate he generated was not worth the damage
   done, because there was another way of doing it." Once again, it was
   the President as Professor-in-Chief, assessing all sides, and observing
   the tilt of the scales. (The day before his speech last week on
   reforming the N.S.A., he told me, "I do not have a yes/no answer on
   clemency for Edward Snowden. This is an active case, where charges have
   been brought.")

   The coverage of the leaks, Obama complained, paints "a picture of a
   rogue agency out there running around and breaking a whole bunch of
   laws and engaging in a `domestic spying program' that isn't accurate.
   But what that does is it synchs up with a public imagination that sees
   Big Brother looming everywhere." The greater damage, in his view, was
   the way the leaks heightened suspicions among foreign leaders. Obama
   enjoyed a good relationship with Angela Merkel, but he admitted that it
   was undermined by reports alleging that the U.S. tapped her cell phone.
   This, he said, felt "like a breach of trust and I can't argue with her
   being aggravated about that."

   But, he said, "there are European governments that we know spy on us,
   and there is a little bit of Claude Rains in `Casablanca'--shocked that
   gambling is going on." He added, "Now, I will say that I automatically
   assume that there are a whole bunch of folks out there trying to spy on
   me, which is why I don't have a phone. I do not send out anything on my
   BlackBerry that I don't assume at some point will be on the front page
   of a newspaper, so it's pretty boring reading for the most part."

   Obama admitted that the N.S.A. has had "too much leeway to do whatever
   it wanted or could." But he didn't feel "any ambivalence" about the
   decisions he has made. "I actually feel confident that the way the
   N.S.A. operates does not threaten the privacy and constitutional rights
   of Americans and that the laws that are in place are sound, and,
   because we've got three branches of government involved and a culture
   that has internalized that domestic spying is against the law, it
   actually works pretty well," he said. "Over all, five years from now,
   when I'm a private citizen, I'm going to feel pretty confident that my
   government is not spying on me."

   Obama has three years left, but it's not difficult to sense a
   politician with an acute sense of time, a politician devising ways to
   widen his legacy without the benefit of any support from Congress. The
   State of the Union speech next week will be a catalogue of things hoped
   for, a resumption of the second inaugural, with an added emphasis on
   the theme of inequality. But Obama knows that major legislation--with
   the possible exception of immigration--is unlikely. And so there is in
   him a certain degree of reduced ambition, a sense that even well before
   the commentariat starts calling him a lame duck he will spend much of
   his time setting an agenda that can be resolved only after he has
   retired to the life of a writer and post-President.

   "One of the things that I've learned to appreciate more as President is
   you are essentially a relay swimmer in a river full of rapids, and that
   river is history," he later told me. "You don't start with a clean
   slate, and the things you start may not come to full fruition on your
   timetable. But you can move things forward. And sometimes the things
   that start small may turn out to be fairly significant. I suspect that
   Ronald Reagan, if you'd asked him, would not have considered the
   earned-income-tax-credit provision in tax reform to be at the top of
   his list of accomplishments. On the other hand, what the E.I.T.C. has
   done, starting with him, being added to by Clinton, being used by me
   during the Recovery Act, has probably kept more people out of poverty
   than a whole lot of other government programs that are currently in
   place."

   Johnson's Great Society will be fifty years old in 2014, but no
   Republican wants a repeat of that scale of government ambition. Obama
   acknowledges this, saying, "The appetite for tax-and-transfer
   strategies, even among Democrats, much less among independents or
   Republicans, is probably somewhat limited, because people are seeing
   their incomes haven't gone up, their wages haven't gone up. It's
   natural for them to think any new taxes may be going to somebody else,
   I'm not confident in terms of how it's going to be spent, I'd much
   rather hang on to what I've got." He will try to do things like set up
   partnerships with selected cities and citizens' groups, sign some
   executive orders, but a "Marshall Plan for the inner city is not going
   to get through Congress anytime soon."
   [92]Cartoon "The striptease I like! The clothes on the floor I'm not
   wild about."September 13, 2010
     * [93]Share
     * [94]Tweet
     *
     *
     * [95]Buy a cartoon

   Indeed, Obama is quick to show a measure of sympathy with the
   Reagan-era conservative analysis of government. "This is where
   sometimes progressives get frustrated with me," he said, "because I
   actually think there was a legitimate critique of the welfare state
   getting bloated, and relying too much on command and control, top-down
   government programs to address it back in the seventies. It's also why
   it's ironic when I'm accused of being this raging socialist who wants
   to amass more and more power for their own government. . . . But I do
   think that some of the anti-government rhetoric, anti-tax rhetoric,
   anti-spending rhetoric that began before Reagan but fully flowered with
   the Reagan Presidency accelerated trends that were already existing, or
   at least robbed us of some tools to deal with the downsides of
   globalization and technology, and that with just some modest
   modification we could grow this economy faster and benefit more people
   and provide more opportunity.

   "After we did all that, there would still be poverty and there would
   still be some inequality and there would still be a lot of work to do
   for the forty-fifth through fiftieth Presidents," he went on, "but I'd
   like to give voice to an impression I think a lot of Americans have,
   which is it's harder to make it now if you are just the average citizen
   who's willing to work hard and has good values, and wasn't born with
   huge advantages or having enjoyed extraordinary luck--that the ground
   is less secure under your feet."

   In the White House, advisers are resigned by now to the idea that some
   liberal voters, dismayed by a range of issues--drones, the N.S.A., the
   half measures of health care and financial reform--have turned away
   from Obama and to newer figures like Elizabeth Warren or Bill de
   Blasio. "Well, look, we live in a very fast-moving culture," Obama
   said. "And, by definition, the President of the United States is
   overexposed, and it is natural, after six, seven years of me being on
   the national stage, that people start wanting to see . . ."

   "Other flavors?"

   "Yes," he said. " `Is there somebody else out there who can give me
   that spark of inspiration or excitement?' I don't spend too much time
   worrying about that. I think the things that are exciting people are
   the same things that excite me and excited me back then. I might have
   given fresh voice to them, but the values are essentially the same."

X--WHAT TIME ALLOWS

   Obama came home from Los Angeles in a dark, freezing downpour. The
   weather was too rotten even for Marine One. He hustled down the steps
   of Air Force One and ducked into his car.

   A few weeks later, I was able to see him for a last conversation in the
   Oval Office. The Obamas had just had a long vacation in Hawaii--sun,
   golf, family, and not much else. The President was sitting behind his
   desk--the Resolute desk, a gift from Queen Victoria to Rutherford B.
   Hayes--and he was reading from a folder marked "Secret." He closed it,
   walked across the room, and settled into an armchair near the
   fireplace. "I got some rest," he said. "But time to get to work."

   Obama has every right to claim a long list of victories since he took
   office: ending two wars; an economic rescue, no matter how imperfect;
   strong Supreme Court nominations; a lack of major scandal; essential
   support for an epochal advance in the civil rights of gays and
   lesbians; more progressive executive orders on climate change, gun
   control, and the end of torture; and, yes, health-care reform. But, no
   matter what one's politics, and however one weighs the arguments of his
   critics, both partisan and principled, one has to wonder about any
   President's capacity to make these decisions amid a thousand
   uncertainties, so many of which are matters of life and death, survival
   and extinction.

   "I have strengths and I have weaknesses, like every President, like
   every person," Obama said. "I do think one of my strengths is
   temperament. I am comfortable with complexity, and I think I'm pretty
   good at keeping my moral compass while recognizing that I am a product
   of original sin. And every morning and every night I'm taking measure
   of my actions against the options and possibilities available to me,
   understanding that there are going to be mistakes that I make and my
   team makes and that America makes; understanding that there are going
   to be limits to the good we can do and the bad that we can prevent, and
   that there's going to be tragedy out there and, by occupying this
   office, I am part of that tragedy occasionally, but that if I am doing
   my very best and basing my decisions on the core values and ideals that
   I was brought up with and that I think are pretty consistent with those
   of most Americans, that at the end of the day things will be better
   rather than worse."

   The cheering crowds and hecklers from the West Coast trip seemed far
   away now. In the preternaturally quiet office, you could hear, between
   every long pause that Obama took, the ticking of a grandfather clock
   just to his left.

   "I think we are born into this world and inherit all the grudges and
   rivalries and hatreds and sins of the past," he said. "But we also
   inherit the beauty and the joy and goodness of our forebears. And we're
   on this planet a pretty short time, so that we cannot remake the world
   entirely during this little stretch that we have." The long view again.
   "But I think our decisions matter," he went on. "And I think America
   was very lucky that Abraham Lincoln was President when he was
   President. If he hadn't been, the course of history would be very
   different. But I also think that, despite being the greatest President,
   in my mind, in our history, it took another hundred and fifty years
   before African-Americans had anything approaching formal equality, much
   less real equality. I think that doesn't diminish Lincoln's
   achievements, but it acknowledges that at the end of the day we're part
   of a long-running story. We just try to get our paragraph right."

   A little while later, as we were leaving the Oval Office and walking
   under the colonnade, Obama said, "I just wanted to add one thing to
   that business about the great-man theory of history. The President of
   the United States cannot remake our society, and that's probably a good
   thing." He paused yet again, always self-editing. "Not `probably,' " he
   said. "It's definitely a good thing." cD

   [remnick.png]

   David Remnick has been editor of The New Yorker since 1998 and a staff
   writer since 1992.
     * [96]More

      More:

     * [97]Politics
     * [98]California
     * [99]Foreign Policy
     * [100]Israel
     * [101](Pres.) Barack Obama
     * [102]Syria
     * [103]Hollywood
     * [104]Congress
     * [105]Terrorism
     * [106]Memoirs
     * [107]Health Care
     * [108]Middle East
     * [109]Republican Party
     * [110]Al Qaeda
     * [111]Washington
     * [112]Poverty
     * [113]Race
     * [114]Presidents
     * [115]Los Angeles
     * [116]Gay Rights
     * [117]Marijuana
     * [118]Same-Sex Marriage
     * [119]Diplomacy
     * [120]African-Americans
     * [121]White House
     * [122]Drones
     * [123]Steven Spielberg
     * [124]Parenting
     * [125]Edward Snowden
     * [126]Inequality
     * [127]Steve Martin
     * [128]Surveillance
     * [129]David Axelrod
     * [130]National Security Agency (N.S.A.)
     * [131](Pres.) Abraham Lincoln
     * [132]Leaks
     * [133]Watergate
     * [134]Seattle
     * [135](Gov.) Mitt Romney
     * [136](Pres.) Lyndon Johnson
     * [137](Sen.) Lindsey Graham
     * [138]Dreamworks
     * [139]Fareed Zakaria
     * [140]Fund-Raising
     * [141]Jeffrey Katzenberg
     * [142]David Frum
     * [143]Valerie Jarrett
     * [144](Pres.) Hassan Rouhani
     * [145]Magic Johnson
     * [146](Sen.) Marco Rubio

Read something that means something

   Try The New Yorker for only a dollar a week. Subscribe Now.

Most Popular

    1. [147]

Liz Smith's Trump Memories
       by [148]Jeffrey Toobin
    2. [149]

Riz Ahmed's Tragic Transformation on "The Night Of"
       by [150]Alexis Okeowo
    3. [151]

Postscript: The Festive Genius of Juan Gabriel, 1950-2016
       by [152]León Krauze
    4. [153]

Are We Really So Modern?
       by [154]Adam Kirsch
    5. [155]

Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, the Voice of ISIS, Is Dead
       by [156]Robin Wright

   [157]

Our thirty most popular

More From the New Yorker

Profiles

[158]Bill Clinton's Quest to Save the World

By [159]David Remnick

Letter from Moscow

[160]Vladimir Putin's New Anti-Americanism

By [161]David Remnick

Dept. of Second Thoughts

[162]Liz Smith's Trump Memories

By Jeffrey Toobin

Culture Desk

[163]Riz Ahmed's Tragic Transformation on "The Night Of"

By Alexis Okeowo

   [164]Link your
   subscription
   [165]Link your subscription
   Have a login?
   [166]Sign In
   Already have a login? [167]Sign in
   [168]Link Your
   Subscription
   Have a login?
   [169]Sign in

     * [170]About Us
     * [171]FAQ
     * [172]Strongbox
     * [173]Customer Care
     * [174]Cartoon Bank
     * [175]On The Town
     * [176]RSS
     * [177]Contact Us
     * [178]Store
     * [179]Careers
     * [180]Reprints/Permissions
     * [181]Press
     * [182]Media Kit

   [183]Condé Nast
   [Subscribe to a magazine____]
   [Other Condé Nast sites_____]

   Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our [184]User Agreement
   (effective January 1, 2014) and [185]Privacy Policy (effective January
   1, 2014). [186]Your California Privacy Rights The material on this site
   may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise
   used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. [187]Ad
   Choices  Ad Choices

References

   Visible links
   1. https://plus.google.com/+newyorker
   2. http://www.newyorker.com/go/mobilefailsafe
   3. file:///var/folders/s_/mv_psnd95m96xph1wt5l39ym0000gn/T/L62424-5773TMP.html
   4. http://www.condenaststore.com/~/new-yorker-store?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=SHOP&AID=1247905545
   5. http://www.newyorker.com/go/failsafe
   6. http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/john-hersey-the-writer-who-let-hiroshima-speak-for-itself
   7. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/russell-shorto
   8. http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/abu-muhammad-al-adnani-the-voice-of-isis-is-dead
   9. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/robin-wright
  10. http://www.newyorker.com/culture/richard-brody/why-movies-still-matter
  11. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/richard-brody
  12. http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/lost-time-in-amatrice-the-past-and-present-of-italys-earthquakes
  13. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/marcia-bjornerud
  14. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/09/05/liz-smiths-reporting-on-donald-trump
  15. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/jeffrey-toobin
  16. http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/riz-ahmeds-tragic-transformation-on-the-night-of
  17. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/alexis-okeowo
  18. http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/postscript-the-festive-genius-of-juan-gabriel-1950-2016
  19. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/leon-krauze
  20. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/09/05/the-dream-of-enlightenment-by-anthony-gottlieb
  21. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/adam-kirsch
  22. file:///var/folders/s_/mv_psnd95m96xph1wt5l39ym0000gn/T/L62424-5773TMP.html
  23. http://www.newyorker.com/news#election-2016
  24. http://www.newyorker.com/news
  25. http://www.newyorker.com/culture
  26. http://www.newyorker.com/books
  27. http://www.newyorker.com/business
  28. http://www.newyorker.com/humor
  29. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons
  30. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine
  31. http://video.newyorker.com/
  32. http://www.newyorker.com/archive
  33. http://festival.newyorker.com/
  34. file:///search
  35. http://www.newyorker.com/go/failsafe
  36. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/annals-of-the-presidency
  37. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/01/27
  38. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/david-remnick
  39. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17984
  40. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17984&display=popup&ref=plugin
  41. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17984&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17984&via=newyorker
  42. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  43. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17430
  44. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17430&display=popup&ref=plugin
  45. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17430&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17430&via=newyorker
  46. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  47. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a18003
  48. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a18003&display=popup&ref=plugin
  49. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a18003&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a18003&via=newyorker
  50. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  51. http://www.newyorker.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/140127_r24566-1200.jpg
  52. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17920
  53. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17920&display=popup&ref=plugin
  54. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17920&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17920&via=newyorker
  55. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  56. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17895
  57. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17895&display=popup&ref=plugin
  58. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17895&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17895&via=newyorker
  59. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  60. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17832
  61. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17832&display=popup&ref=plugin
  62. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17832&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17832&via=newyorker
  63. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  64. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17944
  65. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17944&display=popup&ref=plugin
  66. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17944&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17944&via=newyorker
  67. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  68. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17928
  69. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17928&display=popup&ref=plugin
  70. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17928&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17928&via=newyorker
  71. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  72. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17956
  73. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17956&display=popup&ref=plugin
  74. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17956&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17956&via=newyorker
  75. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  76. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17989
  77. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17989&display=popup&ref=plugin
  78. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17989&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/a17989&via=newyorker
  79. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  80. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/shanahan-2010-11-01
  81. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/shanahan-2010-11-01&display=popup&ref=plugin
  82. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/shanahan-2010-11-01&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/shanahan-2010-11-01&via=newyorker
  83. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  84. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/noth-2010-09-13
  85. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/noth-2010-09-13&display=popup&ref=plugin
  86. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/noth-2010-09-13&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/noth-2010-09-13&via=newyorker
  87. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  88. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/leighton-2011-04-18
  89. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/leighton-2011-04-18&display=popup&ref=plugin
  90. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/leighton-2011-04-18&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/leighton-2011-04-18&via=newyorker
  91. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  92. http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/johnson-2010-09-13
  93. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/johnson-2010-09-13&display=popup&ref=plugin
  94. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/johnson-2010-09-13&text=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/cartoons/johnson-2010-09-13&via=newyorker
  95. http://www.condenaststore.com/-st/New-Yorker-Current-Issue-Prints_c148582_.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=NEWISSUE&AID=1247905545
  96. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/david-remnick
  97. file:///tag/politics-tag
  98. file:///tag/california-tag
  99. file:///tag/foreign-policy-tag
 100. file:///tag/israel-tag
 101. file:///tag/pres-barack-obama-tag
 102. file:///tag/syria-tag
 103. file:///tag/hollywood-tag
 104. file:///tag/congress-tag
 105. file:///tag/terrorism-tag
 106. file:///tag/memoirs-tag
 107. file:///tag/health-care-tag
 108. file:///tag/middle-east-tag
 109. file:///tag/republican-party-tag
 110. file:///tag/al-qaeda-tag
 111. file:///tag/washington-tag
 112. file:///tag/poverty-tag
 113. file:///tag/race-tag
 114. file:///tag/presidents-tag
 115. file:///tag/los-angeles-tag
 116. file:///tag/gay-rights-tag
 117. file:///tag/marijuana-tag
 118. file:///tag/same-sex-marriage-tag
 119. file:///tag/diplomacy-tag
 120. file:///tag/african-americans-tag
 121. file:///tag/white-house-tag
 122. file:///tag/drones-tag
 123. file:///tag/steven-spielberg-tag
 124. file:///tag/parenting-tag
 125. file:///tag/edward-snowden-tag
 126. file:///tag/inequality-tag
 127. file:///tag/steve-martin-tag
 128. file:///tag/surveillance-tag
 129. file:///tag/david-axelrod-tag
 130. file:///tag/national-security-agency-n-s-a-tag
 131. file:///tag/pres-abraham-lincoln-tag
 132. file:///tag/leaks-tag
 133. file:///tag/watergate-tag-2
 134. file:///tag/seattle-tag
 135. file:///tag/gov-mitt-romney-tag
 136. file:///tag/pres-lyndon-johnson-tag
 137. file:///tag/sen-lindsey-graham-tag
 138. file:///tag/dreamworks-tag-2
 139. file:///tag/fareed-zakaria-tag
 140. file:///tag/fund-raising-tag-2
 141. file:///tag/jeffrey-katzenberg-tag
 142. file:///tag/david-frum-tag
 143. file:///tag/valerie-jarrett-tag
 144. file:///tag/pres-hassan-rouhani-tag
 145. file:///tag/magic-johnson-tag
 146. file:///tag/sen-marco-rubio-tag
 147. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/09/05/liz-smiths-reporting-on-donald-trump
 148. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/jeffrey-toobin
 149. http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/riz-ahmeds-tragic-transformation-on-the-night-of
 150. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/alexis-okeowo
 151. http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/postscript-the-festive-genius-of-juan-gabriel-1950-2016
 152. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/leon-krauze
 153. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/09/05/the-dream-of-enlightenment-by-anthony-gottlieb
 154. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/adam-kirsch
 155. http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/abu-muhammad-al-adnani-the-voice-of-isis-is-dead
 156. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/robin-wright
 157. file:///popular?intcid=most-popular
 158. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2006/09/18/the-wanderer-3
 159. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/david-remnick
 160. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/08/11/watching-eclipse
 161. http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/david-remnick
 162. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/09/05/liz-smiths-reporting-on-donald-trump
 163. http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/riz-ahmeds-tragic-transformation-on-the-night-of
 164. javascript:void(0)
 165. javascript:void(0)
 166. javascript:void(0)
 167. javascript:void(0)
 168. javascript:void(0)
 169. javascript:void(0)
 170. file:///about/us/?src=tny-footer
 171. file:///about/faq/?src=tny-footer
 172. https://projects.newyorker.com/strongbox/
 173. http://w1.buysub.com/servlet/CSGateway?cds_mag_code=NYR
 174. http://www.condenaststore.com/~/cartoon-bank?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&ampt;utm_content=tcb-footer&AID=1247905545
 175. http://www.newyorkeronthetown.com/?src=tny-footer
 176. file:///about/feeds/?src=tny-footer
 177. file:///about/contact/?src=tny-footer
 178. http://www.condenaststore.com/-se/newyorkerstore.htm?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=NewYorker&utm_content=tny-footer&AID=1247905545
 179. file:///about/careers
 180. http://www.condenast.com/reprints-permissions?src=tny-footer
 181. file:///about/press/?src=tny-footer
 182. http://www.condenast.com/brands/new-yorker/media-kit/?src=tny-footer
 183. http://www.condenast.com/?src=tny-footer
 184. http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy
 185. http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy
 186. http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy-california
 187. http://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy#privacypolicy-optout

   Hidden links:
 189. file://localhost/
 190. http://www.newyorker.com/go/mobilefailsafe
 191. https://www.facebook.com/sharer/sharer.php?u=http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/01/27/going-the-distance-david-remnick&display=popup&ref=plugin
 192. https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?original_referer=http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/01/27/going-the-distance-david-remnick&text=Going+the+Distance&tw_p=tweetbutton&url=http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/01/27/going-the-distance-david-remnick&via=newyorker
 193. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20Going%20the%20Distance&body=Going%20the%20Distance%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fmagazine%2F2014%2F01%2F27%2Fgoing-the-distance-david-remnick
 194. file://localhost/var/folders/s_/mv_psnd95m96xph1wt5l39ym0000gn/T/L62424-5773TMP.html
 195. http://www.newyorker.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/140127_r24535-1200.jpg
 196. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fa17984
 197. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fa17430
 198. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fa18003
 199. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fa17920
 200. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fa17895
 201. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fa17832
 202. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fa17944
 203. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fa17928
 204. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fa17956
 205. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fa17989
 206. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fshanahan-2010-11-01
 207. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fnoth-2010-09-13
 208. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fleighton-2011-04-18
 209. mailto:?subject=From%20newyorker.com:%20A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20&body=A%20Cartoon%20from%20The%20New%20Yorker%20%0Ahttp%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fcartoons%2Fjohnson-2010-09-13
 210. http://www.newyorker.com/go/failsafe
 211. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2006/09/18/the-wanderer-3
 212. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/08/11/watching-eclipse
 213. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/09/05/liz-smiths-reporting-on-donald-trump
 214. http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/riz-ahmeds-tragic-transformation-on-the-night-of
 215. http://www.omniture.com/
